Welcome to this final part of the course, which is focused on methods of causal mechanistic interpretability.
In this intro video, I will remind you of a few things that I mentioned before we started doing observational
interp and also say a few things about the challenges in trying to establish causality.
And yes, I will briefly mention a bridge in Amsterdam.
This is a slide that I showed earlier in the course when I first introduced mechanistic interpretability
as a field.
This is just a brief reminder that the idea is to use data analysis methods to try to understand the
operations and representations that these large language models learn.
This kind of research is relevant for AI safety, and it's also just interesting to study as an example
of a complex emergent system.
And now here are a few more specific words about causal interpretability research.
So the idea here is not just to analyze data extracted from a model, but to actually interfere with
the model.
So we can literally go inside the model and change specific patterns of activations in different parts
of the model during a forward pass or while we are training the model in the rest of this course, I'm
just going to focus on interfering with model activations during forward passes of already trained models.
This causal approach has the same applications as observational, mechanistic, interpretability, and
also allows for causally testing hypotheses about the roles of different parts of the model, or how
different model activations lead to the output, logits and token selection.
So language production.
It turns out that although you do need to learn a few new code formulations, most of what you need
to do for causally interfering with models is what you've already learned how to do in the previous
sections.
In particular, we will use hooks to access the internal workings of the model.
We will define and use the hook functions in a slightly different way compared to what you did in the
previous several sections.
But it's actually pretty simple once you've already gotten to this point in the course.
I will give more details about each of these specific methods as I introduce them over the next couple
of sections.
But just to say a few words here, generally about the challenges of causally interfering with language
models during inference.
As I just mentioned in the previous slide, it is actually surprisingly simple to manipulate models
once you already know how to create and use an implant.
hook functions.
One thing that I really like about the causal approach is that it allows us to ask questions about counterfactuals.
A counterfactual is asking the question what would happen if something had been different?
You can ask these kinds of questions about your life and decisions you've made.
For example, what would your life be like now if you hadn't enrolled in this course?
Well, in real life we cannot run experiments like that.
But with language models, we actually can.
We can ask what token the model would predict if we had manipulated the context in different ways.
There are three sources of difficulties in causal interpretability research.
The first is that there are just so many moving parts inside a model, so many neurons and dimensions
and attention heads and transformer blocks and so on, that there's just limitless possibilities for
parts of the model to manipulate.
And then you need to decide whether to zero out the activations, replace them with some other value
like the average or the median.
Add noise or replace entirely with noise.
You can also take the activations or the embeddings vectors from one model and insert them into another
model.
There's just so many possibilities that it can be challenging to focus the analyses onto a very small
number of key experiments to run.
A second challenge is just a difficulty that is present in all complex systems.
The representations and computations that take place inside a language model are distributed.
They are multidimensional, possibly spanning multiple spatial scales, multiple different layers of
the model.
And there are also mechanisms that are specifically built into the model to compensate for disruptions.
And part of that is the various layer normalizations, which can compensate for changes in activation
magnitudes or distributional shifts.
And also part of that is that the models have specifically been trained to be robust to aberrant patterns
being injected into the neurons.
Here I'm referring in particular to dropout regularization.
So when you do dropout during training, you are literally just zeroing out certain parts of the model.
And the model has to learn to deal with that and be robust to those manipulations.
So then you do causal manipulations where you zero out some activation patterns, and the model has
literally learned to deal with patterns like that during training.
A third source of difficulty is the lack of ground truth to verify the results that you get.
This is actually a bit better than the lack of ground truth with the observational methods, because
at least with intervention experiments you can do like parametric manipulations, for example, manipulating
the different heads in turn, or scaling activation patterns by different amounts.
And of course, you can see how the causal manipulations impact the model predictions and the text that
it generates.
Okay.
All that said, I don't mean to suggest that this kind of research is impossible or that progress cannot
be made.
The field is new and developing quickly.
Experiments and theories, ideas, interpretations are all getting better, more precise and more sophisticated.
But the good thing for you is that the foundational techniques are the same, and probably will be for
a long time.
This is good news because it means that even though the field is developing quickly, the techniques
and the manipulations that you will learn in this section and what you have learned earlier in the course
will continue to be relevant into the future even as the field continues to improve.
I promised there would be a bridge.
And here is the bridge.
This is a picture of the Tinker Brook in Amsterdam.
The word brook means bridge.
And Tinker is a neighborhood in Amsterdam.
This is one of the many bridges in Amsterdam that opens up to allow tall ships to pass through.
Now, this double green structure on top of the bridge here.
This is actually electrical wiring.
It's part of the electrical grid.
And that means that when the bridge opens to let ships pass through, the electrical grid is literally
disconnected over here.
So these wires are no longer touching.
Electricity cannot flow through this node on the grid.
But does this mean that this entire side of the city loses power every time the bridge opens?
Obviously not.
The electrical grid in Amsterdam is specifically engineered so that when there is a disruption in the
flow of electricity somewhere.
The rest of the network just reroutes and the electricity can still flow.
And the final result is exactly the same.
In other words, the local disruptions are completely compensated for by this network architecture.
And this is something to think about with complex systems.
Even though this bridge really is an important part of the electricity network, the grid itself is
robust to manipulations or disruptions of individual parts of the network.
And that's where I will close this video.
Causal manipulations are important in science, but they can be tricky to interpret for multiple reasons.
And so they should be seen as complementary methods along with the non-causal approaches that you are
now familiar with, causal methods should not be seen as replacements that supersede observational methods.